# Predefined Enrichment Operators

Here you will find a comprehensive list of the enrichment operators included in DEER, their degree bounds, parameters and modes of operation.
If not specified otherwise, they need to have exactly one input and exactly one output dataset.

## Filter Enrichment Operator {#filter}

The idea of the filter enrichment operator is to select a specific set of the input dataset triples. Then, the selected set of  triples are generated by the filter operator as its output. The filter enrichment operator define the set of triple to be selected using the single parameter `:selectors`. Where the `:selectors` parameter accepts one list of selector types. By selector we mean the triple patterns to be applied to the input dataset. The filter enrichment operator has three basic selectors types. i.e. the `:subject`, `:predicate` and `:object` selectors.


The following example configuration demonstrates the configuration of the filter enrichment operator for filtering only the predicates  `geo:lat`, `geo:long`, `rdfs:label` and `owl:sameAs`. 

```turtle
@prefix : <http://deer.aksw.org/vocabulary/#> .
@prefix rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#> .
@prefix geo: <http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/wgs84_pos#> .
@prefix owl: <http://www.w3.org/2002/07/owl#> .

:node_filter
              :implementedIn     :FilterEnrichmentOperator ;
              :hasInput          ( :node_in ) ;
              :hasOutput         ( :node_out ) ;
              :selectors         (
                    [ :predicate geo:lat ]
                    [ :predicate geo:long ]
                    [ :predicate rdfs:label ]
                    [ :predicate owl:sameAs ]
              ) .
```

## Linking Enrichment Operator {#linking}

The idea of the linking enrichment operator is to enrich models with links discovered using LIMES. 
It can be used in two modes:
  1. enriching a dataset with links from an external linking process (1 input, 1-2 outputs)  
     * This mode will be selected if the linking enrichment operator node has exactly one input dataset.  
     * If it has exactly one output dataset, it will be the original input dataset enriched with the links.  
     * If it has exactly two output datasets, the first will be just the original input dataset and the second will be a dataset of just the generated links.
     * In this mode, the following parameters are accepted:
        - `:specFile` which is a path for LIMES specification file
        - `:linksPart` one of `"source"`, `"target"`. If `"source"` is selected *(default)*, nothing happens. If `"target"` is selected, we swap subjects and objects in the generated links. 
        - `:selectMode` determines the strategy for selecting which links to keep from the original full limes mapping
           * `"all"` *(default)* all links are kept 
           * `"best1toN"` enforces 1-to-N mapping. For each target resource, only keep the best link to the source. 
           * `"best1to1"` enforces 1-to-1 mapping. No resource in either target or source dataset will appear in more than one link.
           * `"best"` keep just the best link. If there are ties, it is unspecified which will be selected.
  2. enriching a dataset with links from an internal linking process (2 inputs, 1-3 outputs)
     * This mode will be selected if the linking enrichment operator node has exactly two input datasets.  
     * If it has exactly one output dataset, it will be the result of merging the two input datasets and the generated links  
     * If it has exactly two output datasets, they will correspond to the two input datasets in order and depending on the parameter `:linksPart`, either the first or the second will be enriched with the generated links.
     * If it has exactly three output datasets, they will correspond to the two input datasets in order and the third one will be a dataset of just the generated links.
     * In this mode, the following parameters are accepted:
        - `:linksPart` one of `"source"`, `"target"`. If `"source"` is selected *(default)*, nothing happens. If `"target"` is selected, we swap subjects and objects in the generated links.  
          Moreover, if the number of output datasets is exactly two, this parameter will decide which of the two datasets will be enriched with the generated links. If it is "source" it will be the first, if it is "target" it will be the second.      
        - `:selectMode` determines the strategy for selecting which links to keep from the original full limes mapping
           * `"all"` *(default)* all links are kept 
           * `"best1toN"` enforces 1-to-N mapping. For each target resource, only keep the best link to the source. 
           * `"best1to1"` enforces 1-to-1 mapping. No resource in either target or source dataset will appear in more than one link.
           * `"best"` keep just the best link. If there are ties, it is unspecified which will be selected.
        - `:linkSpecification` the link specification to execute (as string literal)
        - `:linkingPredicate` the predicate with which links will be built
        - `:threshold` the similarity threshold. All links in the resulted mapping will have a similarity value greater than or equal to the threshold. 
  
In the following example, the linking enrichment operator is used based on the LIMES configuration file "limes_specs.xml" and the source dataset is the one to be enriched.
  
  ```turtle
@prefix : <http://deer.aksw.org/vocabulary/#> .

:node_linking
              :implementedIn     :LinkingEnrichmentOperator ;
              :hasInput          ( :node_in ) ;
              :hasOutput         ( :node_out ) ;
              :specFile          "limes_specs.xml" ;
              :linksPart         "source" .
```

## Dereferencing Enrichment Operator {#deref}

For datasets which contain similarity properties links (e.g. `owl:sameAs`), the idea dereferencing enrichment operator is to deference all links from an externally linked dataset to our input dataset by using a content negotiation on HTTP. This process returns a set of triples that need to be filtered for relevant information. In addition to the common parameters, the dereferencing operator uses the  parameter `operations`, which is a list of the following configurations:
  - `:lookUpPrefix` interesting resources from the external dataset
  - `:dereferencingProperty` interesting property to extract from the external dataset 
  - `importProperty` for renaming of the `:dereferencingProperty` in the output dataset
  
In the following example, the dereferencing enrichment operator is used to find `dbo:abstract` from external dataset of DBpedia and export them using the `dcterms:description`.

  ```turtle
 @prefix : <http://deer.aksw.org/vocabulary/#> .
 @prefix dbo: <http://dbpedia.org/property/> .
 @prefix dcterms: <http://purl.org/dc/terms/> .
  
:dereferencing_dbp
              :implementedIn    :DereferencingEnrichmentOperator ;
              :hasInput         ( :node_in ) ;
              :hasOutput        ( :node_out ) ;
              :operations       (
                    [ :lookUpPrefix "http://de.dbpedia.org/resource" ;
                      :dereferencingProperty dbo:abstract ;
                      :importProperty dcterms:description ]
              ) .
```

## NER Enrichment Operator {#ner}


The enrichment information hidden in datatype properties is retrieved by using Named Entity Recognition (NER) enrichment operator.
In the current version of DEER, we rely on the FOX framework. In the following, we provides details about the NER operator parameters:
	- `:literalProperty` Literal property used by FOX for NER. If not set, the top ranked literal property will be pecked automatically by DEER, which ranks the lateral properties of a model according to the average size of each literal property divided by the number of instances of such property.
	- `:importProperty` Property added to be added into the input dataset.
	- `:neType` Force FOX to look for a specific NE’s types only. Available types are: `:location` (default value), `:person:`, `:organization`, and `:all` to retrieve the all the previous three types.
	- `:askEndpoint` Ask the DBpedia endpoint for each location returned by FOX (setting it generates slower execution time but more accurate results). By default this parameter is set to false.

## Clone Enrichment Operator {#clone}

The idea behind the clone operator is to enable parallel enrichment of multiple copies of the same dataset. The clone operator takes one dataset as input and produces n ≥ 2 output datasets, which are all identical to the input dataset. 

In the following example, the clone operator is used to make 2 copies of the input dataset from `:node_1` into `:node_1_clone_1` and `:node_1_clone_2`

  ```turtle
@prefix : <http://deer.aksw.org/vocabulary/#> .

:node_clone
              :implementedIn     :CloneEnrichmentOperator 
              :hasInput          ( :node_in ) ;
              :hasOutput         ( :node_in_clone_1  :node_in_clone_2) .
```

## Merge Enrichment Operator {#merge}

The idea behind the merge operator is to enable combining datasets. The merge operator takes a set of n ≥ 2 input datasets and merges them into one output dataset containing all the input datasets’ triples. 

In the following example, the merge operator is used to combine the 2 input datasets of `:node_1` and `:node_2` into `:node_3`


  ```turtle
@prefix : <http://deer.aksw.org/vocabulary/#> .

:node_merge
              :implementedIn     :MergeEnrichmentOperator ;
              :hasInput          ( :node_in_1 :node_in_2) ;
              :hasOutput         ( :node_out) .
```

## GeoFusion Enrichment Operator {#geofusion}

The idea of the geo-fusion enrichment operator is to merge two or more input datasets into one fused output dataset.
In addtion to the common parameters, the geo-fusion operator have the following additional parameter:
- The `:fusionAction` is used to specify the how to fuse geo-spatial properties (by default the `geo:lat` and `geo:long`), the available fusion actions are:
    * "takeA" always use geometry from first dataset
    * "takeB" always use geometry from second dataset
    * "takeAll" merge all geometries
    * "takeMostDetailed" use most detailed geometry from any model, e.g., in terms of lexical length of latitude and longitude values
 - The `:mergeOtherStatements` parameter is used to enable the merge of all other non geo-spacial properties from all input dataset to the output dataset

```turtle
@prefix : <http://deer.aksw.org/vocabulary/#> .
@prefix rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#> .
@prefix geo: <http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/wgs84_pos#> .
@prefix owl: <http://www.w3.org/2002/07/owl#> .

:node_geofusion
              :implementedIn     :GeoFusionEnrichmentOperator ;
              :hasInput          ( :node_in_1 :node_in_2 ) ;
              :hasOutput         ( :node_out ) ;
              :fusionAction      "takeAll" ;
              :mergeOtherStatements
                                 "true" .
```

## Authority Conformation Enrichment Operator {#aconf}

The idea of the authority conformation operator is to change a specified source URI authority to a specified target URI authority. In addition to the common parameters, the authority conformation enrichment operator accepts the two basic parameters of `:sourceSubjectAuthority` and `:targetSubjectAuthority` for specifying the source and target authorities respectively. 

In the following example, we use the `:sourceSubjectAuthority` of `http://dbpedia.org` and the `:targetSubjectAuthority` of `http://deer.org`. Such configuration will change a resource like `http://dbpedia.org/Berlin` to `http://deer.org/Berlin`. 

```turtle
@prefix : <http://deer.aksw.org/vocabulary/#> .

:node_a_conf
              :implementedIn     :AuthorityConformationEnrichmentOperator ;
              :hasInput          ( :node_in ) ;
              :hasOutput         ( :node_out ) ;
              :sourceSubjectAuthority
                                 "http://dbpedia.org" ;
              :targetSubjectAuthority
                                 "http://deer.org" .
```

## Predicate Conformation Enrichment Operator {#pconf}

The idea of the predicate conformation operator is to replace all instances of specified source property to a specified target predicated with the same object and subject values. In addition to the common parameters, the predicate conformation enrichment operator accepts the basic parameters of `:propertyMapping` for specifying the `:source` and `:target` predicates as a list. 

In the following example, we use the predicate conformation enrichment operator to change all instances of `rdf:label` to `SKOS:prefLabel`. For example, a triple as  `dbp:Berlin rdf:label "Berlin"` to `dbp:Berlin skos:prefLabel "Berlin"`. 

```turtle
@prefix : <http://deer.aksw.org/vocabulary/#> .
@prefix rdf: <http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#> .
@prefix skos: <http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/core#> .

:node_p_conf
              :implementedIn     :PredicateConformationEnrichmentOperator ;
              :hasInput          ( :node_in ) ;
              :hasOutput         ( :node_out ) ;
              :propertyMapping    (
                    [ :source rdf:label ]
                    [ :target skos:prefLabel ]
              ) .
```

## GeoDistance Enrichment Operator {#geodistance}

The idea of the geo-distance operator is to enrich resources that are connected via
some predicate (configured with parameter `:selectPredicate`) with the distance between
their respective geo coordinates.
The distance in kilometers will be added as a string literal to the subject via the predicate specified
in parameter `:distancePredicate`. 

In the following example, we use the geo-distance enrichment operator to enrich cities from DBPedia
with the distance to their western adjacent cities. 

```turtle
@prefix : <http://deer.aksw.org/vocabulary/#> .
@prefix dbp : <http://dbpedia.org/property/> .

:node_geodistance
              :implementedIn     :GeoDistanceEnrichmentOperator ;
              :hasInput          ( :node_in ) ;
              :hasOutput         ( :node_out ) ;
              :selectPredicate   dbp:west ; 
              :distancePredicate :distanceToNextCityInTheWest .
```